Title: Long overdue update. EuroScipy and SSLST 2011
Date: 2011-09-05 00:08
Author: vene
Category: Uncategorized
Slug: long-overdue-update-euroscipy-and-sslst-2011

Anybody reading my blog should have expected me to blog about the end of
my GSoC. Sorry to disappoint, but I simply did not experience anything
similar to an ending. On the contrary, I feel like things have barely
started. Also, I apologize for one of the few posts here without pretty
pictures! :)

For the last two weeks, I've been traveling. I attended the EuroScipy
conference thanks to Fabian, who offered me a place to sleep during the
week. We sprinted hard, we discussed tricky APIs, we drank a lot of
coffee, beer, and ate well in lovely Paris. It was great to meet all of
the celebrities, the people who keep the scientific Python globe
turning.

Many thanks to Gael and Emmanuelle, who worked very, very hard on
organizing everything, so they weren't around and I didn't get to say
goodbye when I ran to catch my plane last Sunday.

I was in a hurry, heading to Tarragona, a beautiful city on the Catalan
coast, where the public university organized the 2011 summer school in
linguistics and speech technologies (SSLST). This was a great
opportunity to meet many fellow young researchers working in
computational linguistics. I will not go into details now, because I
plan expand on this, but I would like to state a couple of things.
Firsty, even though NLP seems to be mostly a Java-dominated affair (note
for example [Stanford's NLP toolkit][] and [Sheffield's GATE][]), the
[computational linguistics and psycholinguistics research center
(CLiPS)][] at the University of Antwerp actually briefly manifested its
devotion to Python and NLTK via its research director, Walter Daelemans.

It was good to see a little love for Python in this field. NLTK is very
underrepresented in the SciPy community, I couldn't find anybody at the
EuroScipy conference knowing too much about it or about the people
behind it.

Another lab that has done a lot of cool work is [Cental][] at the
Catholic University of Louvain, and they also use Python for natural
language processing. Maybe in the coming years, we will see a Python for
Computational Linguistics sattelite, along with Physics and
Neuroscience. Doesn't it sound more fun? :P

Secondly, I wish SSLST were organized by someone like Gael! As the
discussion at dinner regarding who will organize next year's EuroScipy
went, it is imperative that the organizers be actively involved in the
community, and generally passionate about it. Even though I'm comparing
apples and oranges, Carlos Martin-Vide behaved in this context like a
old, tired, emotionless academic, not taking into account even lunch
breaks for the whole group, not to mention any sort of getting together
or even a group photo (which, alas, we were not able to take, apart from
small groups.) They said it couldn't be done. Of course it could, they
just didn't want it hard enough.

Finally, before signing off, I would like to announce that because the
Romanian Ministry of Education failed to specify the allocated number of
public positions for masters' programmes, the admission exam at the
University of Bucharest will be delayed by a couple of weeks. Luckily,
this will allow me to attend [RANLP 2011][] in Hissar, Bulgaria a week
from now, where I will present my poster entitled:  
"Can alternations be learned? A machine learning approach to Romanian
verb conjugation" by Liviu P. Dinu, Emil Ionescu, Vlad Niculae and
Octavia-Maria Sulea. See you in Hissar!

  [Stanford's NLP toolkit]: http://nlp.stanford.edu/software/index.shtml
  [Sheffield's GATE]: http://gate.ac.uk/
  [computational linguistics and psycholinguistics research center
  (CLiPS)]: http://www.clips.ua.ac.be/
  [Cental]: http://www.uclouvain.be/cental
  [RANLP 2011]: http://lml.bas.bg/ranlp2011/start3.php
